docs/pages/academy/6-analytics/module-review.md, before:

---
title: Module review
keywords: setup, getting started
last_updated: September 2017
tags: [getting-started, graql]
sidebar: academy_sidebar
permalink: ./academy/analytics-review.html
folder: academy
toc: false
KB: academy
---

You have almost completed the Grakn Academy. Only a bunch of exercises left to do!

### Exercise 1: OLAP and OLTP queries

What is the difference between an OLAP and an OLTP query? Can you make an example of each in Graql?

### Exercise 2: Count queries

Write a `compute count` query that tells you how many countries are in the academy dataset and run it in the Dashboard.

### Exercise 3: Statistics queries

Use Graql analytics to find:

  1. The average risk of a bond
  2. The maximum distance from the coast of an oil platform

### Exercise 4: Compute queries and aggregates

What are the differences between compute queries and aggregate queries? When you should use each one?

### Exercise 5: Shortest paths

Find the shortest path between the region named "Africa" and the company named "BP". Use the graphical interfaces (i.e. the graph visualiser).

### Exercise 6: Degree queries

Use a `compute degrees` query to find how many countries are contained in each region. Copy the ID of the region with the most countries and verify in the graph visualiser that it is EUROPE by running the query

```
match $x id REGION_ID; get;
```

### Exercise 7: Cluster queries

Find clusters of companies, bonds and `issues` relationships and verify that they are more or less evenly distributed (that is, every company issues more or less the same number of bonds).


## Keep calm and release the Grakn!

**CONGRATULATIONS!** You have graduated from the Grakn Academy! The only thing left to do is starting developing your own projects. If you need more help or want to ask question you can delve into the [documentation](../index.html) and the [blog](https://blog.grakn.ai) to get more ideas on how to use Grakn. Make sure as well to check our [discussion forum](https://discuss.grakn.ai) and to [join our Slack community](https://grakn.ai/slack.html), where you will find plenty of people willing to help should you have any doubts.

Be sure to mention you completed the Grakn Academy for extra kudos!

Commit message:

Academy small changes (#2757)
* typos, grammar, wording, small changes

* added the requested hyphenation

* typos, wording, fixed a TODO summary, updated update date

* deleted *warning* paragraph in the beginning of the academy as requested

* typos, wordin, did not restructure the visualisation exercise even though I could not reproduce it - have to check with others if this part changed in grakn

* typos, wording, grammar

* wording, added link to next module in review in order to keep flow

* fixed typo

* copied small changes by hand to get them into the small-changes PR

docs/pages/academy/6-analytics/module-review.md, after:

---
title: Module review
keywords: setup, getting started
last_updated: April 2018
tags: [getting-started, graql]
sidebar: academy_sidebar
permalink: ./academy/analytics-review.html
folder: academy
toc: false
KB: academy
---

You have almost completed the Grakn Academy. Only a bunch of exercises left to do!

### Exercise 1: OLAP and OLTP queries

What is the difference between an OLAP and an OLTP query? Can you come up with an example of each in Graql?

### Exercise 2: Count queries

Write a `compute count` query that tells you how many countries there are in the academy dataset and run it in the Dashboard.

### Exercise 3: Statistics queries

Use Graql analytics to find:

  1. The average risk of a bond
  2. The maximum distance from the coast of an oil platform

### Exercise 4: Compute queries and aggregates

What are the differences between compute queries and aggregate queries? When should you use which one?

### Exercise 5: Shortest paths

Find the shortest path between the region named "Africa" and the company named "BP". Use the graphical interfaces (i.e. the graph visualiser).

### Exercise 6: Degree queries

Use a `compute degrees` query to find how many countries are contained in each region. Copy the ID of the region with the most countries and verify in the graph visualiser that it is EUROPE by running the query

```
match $x id REGION_ID; get;
```

### Exercise 7: Cluster queries

Find clusters of companies, bonds and `issues` relationships and verify that they are more or less evenly distributed (that is, every company issues more or less the same number of bonds).


## Keep calm and release the Grakn!

**CONGRATULATIONS!** You have graduated from the Grakn Academy! The only thing left to do is to start developing your own projects. If you need more help or want to ask question you can delve into the [documentation](../index.html) and the [blog](https://blog.grakn.ai) to get more ideas on how to use Grakn. Make sure as well to check our [discussion forum](https://discuss.grakn.ai) and to [join our Slack community](https://grakn.ai/slack.html), where you will find a lot of people willing to help should you ever need assistance.

Be sure to mention, that you completed the Grakn Academy for extra kudos!
