docs/pages/docs/11-examples/java-analytics.md, before:

---
title: Graql Analytics using Java
keywords: analytics, machine-learning
tags: [analytics, examples, java]
summary: "How to use Graql analytics methods in Java"
sidebar: documentation_sidebar
permalink: /docs/examples/java-analytics
folder: docs
KB: genealogy-with-cluster
---

In this example, we are going to introduce the analytics package using the basic genealogy example. We will use Java APIs to determine clusters and degrees in the data - specifically we will determine clusters of people who are related by marriage and how large those clusters are using two graph algorithms:

* the cluster algorithm - to identify which people are related
* the degree algorithm - to count the size of the cluster.

<!-- TO DO - Put this back in 0.13

You can find *basic-genealogy.gql* in the *examples* directory of the Grakn distribution zip. You can also find it on [Github](https://github.com/graknlabs/grakn/blob/master/grakn-dist/src/examples/basic-genealogy.gql).

The first step is to load it into Grakn using the terminal. Start Grakn, and load the file as follows:

```bash
./grakn server start
./graql console -f ./examples/basic-genealogy.gql -k "genealogy"
```

You can test in the Graql shell that all has loaded correctly. For example:

```bash
./graql console -k genealogy
>>>match $p isa person, has identifier $i;
```
-->


## Getting Started

If you have not yet set up the Grakn environment, please see the [Setup guide](../get-started/setup-guide).

First, we start Grakn Engine using the terminal:

```bash
./grakn server start
```

The rest of the project is contained in the Java example code, which can be found on [Github](https://github.com/graknlabs/grakn/blob/master/grakn-dist/src/examples/basic-genealogy.gql). The maven dependencies for this project are:

```xml
<dependency>
<groupId>ai.grakn</groupId>
<artifactId>grakn-factory</artifactId>
<version>${grakn.version}</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
<groupId>org.slf4j</groupId>
<artifactId>slf4j-nop</artifactId>
<version>1.7.20</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
<groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
<artifactId>spring-boot-starter-tomcat</artifactId>
<version>1.2.4.RELEASE</version>
</dependency>
```

The `slf4j-nop` dependency is a work around because we are using a later version of Spark. The spring framework dependency is a current bug workaround in GRAKN.AI version 0.12.0.

First, we load the schema and data we will be working with, which is the familiar *basic-genealogy.gql* dataset.

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static void loadBasicGenealogy() {
    ClassLoader classLoader = Main.class.getClassLoader();
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {
        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.WRITE)) {
            try {
                tx.graql().parse(IOUtils.toString(classLoader.getResourceAsStream("basic-genealogy.gql"))).execute();
                } catch (IOException e) {
                    e.printStackTrace();
            }
            tx.commit();
        }
    }
}
```

## Connect to Grakn Engine

The next thing to do is connect to the running engine instance and check that the knowledge base contains the data that we expect. This can be achieved with the following code:

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static void testConnection() {
    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        // open a tx (database transaction)
        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.READ)) {

            // construct a match to find people
            Match match = tx.graql().match(var("x").isa("person"));

            // execute the query
            List<Map<String, Concept>> result = match.limit(10).get().execute();

            // write the results to the console
            result.forEach(System.out::println);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

## Compute the Clusters

Now that we have established the connection to Grakn engine works we can obtain the transaction object and compute the clusters that we are interested in:

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static Map<String, Set<String>> computeClusters() {
    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        // open a tx (database transaction)
        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.READ)) {

            // construct the analytics cluster query
            ClusterQuery<Map<String, Set<String>>> query = tx.graql().compute().cluster().in("person", "marriage").members();

            // execute the analytics query
            Map<String, Set<String>> clusters = query.execute();

            return clusters;
            }
        }
    }
```

Here we have used the `in` syntax to specify that we want to compute the clusters while only considering instances of the types `marriage` and `person`. The knowledge base that we are effectively working on can be seen in the image below. We can see three clusters, but there are more in the basic genealogy example. The code above will have found all of the clusters and returned a `Map` from the unique cluster label to a set containing the ids of the instances in the cluster.

If we had not used the members syntax we would only know the size of the clusters not the members.

![Visualiser UI](/images/java-analytics-1.png)


## Persist the Cluster Information

Now that we have information about the clusters, it would be useful to add it to the knowledge base so that we can visualise it. We can do this by creating a new entity type called `cluster` and a new relationship type called `grouping` with the roles `group` and `member`. The schema can be mutated as follows:

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static void mutateOntology() {
    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        // open a tx (database transaction)
        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.WRITE)) {

            // create set of vars representing the mutation
            Var group = Graql.var("group").label("group").sub("role");
            Var member = Graql.var("member").label("member").sub("role");
            Var grouping = Graql.var("grouping").label("grouping").sub("relationship").relates(group).relates(member);
            Var cluster = Graql.var("cluster").label("cluster").sub("entity").plays(group);
            Var personPlaysRole = Graql.var("person").label("person").plays("member");
            Var marriagePlaysRole = Graql.var("marriage").label("marriage").plays("member");

            // construct the insert query
            InsertQuery query = tx.graql().insert(group, member, grouping, cluster, personPlaysRole, marriagePlaysRole);

            // execute the insert query
            query.execute();

            // don't forget to commit the changes
            tx.commit();
        }
    }
}
```

We also have to ensure that the existing types in the schema can play the specified roles.

Now all that is left is to populate the graph with the clusters and grouping relationships. To do this we can create a cluster for each result from the analytics query, which can then be attached to each of the concepts returned in the set of members:

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static void persistClusters(Map<String, Set<String>> results) {

    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        // iterate through results of cluster query
        results.forEach((clusterID, memberSet) -> {

            // open a tx (database transaction)
            try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.WRITE)) {

                    // collect the vars to insert
                    Set<Var> insertVars = new HashSet<>();

                    // create the cluster
                    Var cluster = Graql.var().isa("cluster");
                    insertVars.add(cluster);

                    // attach the members
                    memberSet.forEach(member -> {
                        Var memberVar = Graql.var().id(ConceptId.of(member));
                        insertVars.add(Graql.var().isa("grouping").rel("group", cluster).rel("member",memberVar));
                    });

                // execute query and commit
                tx.graql().insert(insertVars).execute();
                tx.commit();
            }
        });
    }
}
```

We can now switch to the visualiser, by browsing to [localhost:4567](http://localhost:4567), and execute this query:

```graql
match $x isa cluster; get;
```

If you explore the results you can now see the entities that are members of a given cluster, similar to the image shown below.

![Visualiser UI](/images/java-analytics-2.png)

## Compute the degrees

When using the visualiser it is probably quite useful to be able to see the size of the cluster before clicking on it. In order to add this information to the knowledge base we will use another analytics function degree. The code to compute the degree is:

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static Map<Long, Set<String>> degreeOfClusters() {
    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        // open a tx (database transaction)
        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.READ)) {

            // construct the analytics cluster query
            DegreeQuery query = tx.graql().compute().degree().in("cluster", "grouping").of("cluster");

            // execute the analytics query
            Map<Long, Set<String>> degrees = query.execute();

            return degrees;
        }
    }
}
```

The `in` syntax has again been used here to restrict the algorithm to the knowledge base shown below. Further, the `of` syntax has been used to compute the degree for the cluster alone. What is returned from this calculation is a `Map` from the degree which is a `long` to the ids of the instances that have that degree.


## Persist the Degrees

As we did when computing the clusters, we need to put the information back into the knowledge base. This time we will attach an attribute called `degree` to the cluster entity. The schema mutation and persisting of the degrees is performed in a single method:


<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static void persistDegrees(Map<Long, Set<String>> degrees) {
    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.WRITE)) {

            // mutate the schema
            Var degree = Graql.var().label("degree").sub("attribute").datatype(ResourceType.DataType.LONG);
            Var cluster = Graql.var().label("cluster").has("degree");

            // execute the query
            tx.graql().insert(degree, cluster).execute();

            // don't forget to commit
            tx.commit();
            }

            try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.WRITE)) {

            // add the degrees to the cluster
            Set<Var> degreeMutation = new HashSet<>();
            degrees.forEach((degree, concepts) -> {
                concepts.forEach(concept -> {
                    degreeMutation.add(Graql.var().id(ConceptId.of(concept)).has("degree",degree));
                });
            });

            // execute the query
            tx.graql().insert(degreeMutation).execute();

            // don't forget to commit
            tx.commit();
            }
        }
    }
```

We used a single transaction for this because it is a small knowledge base.

We can now query for all the clusters in the visualiser, see their size and click on them to find the members.

<!-- IMAGE TO DO -->

## Summary

The complete working code can be found here in our `sample-projects` repo on [Github](https://github.com/graknlabs/sample-projects/tree/master/example-analytics-genealogy).

Commit message:

Minor update in docs w.r.t the term "knowledge graph" (#2681)
* KBMS -> KGMS

* Knowledge Base -> Knowledge Graph

* knowledge base -> knowledge graph

* hyper-relational database -> knowledge graph

* fixed a bunch of lols

* more lols

docs/pages/docs/11-examples/java-analytics.md, after:

---
title: Graql Analytics using Java
keywords: analytics, machine-learning
tags: [analytics, examples, java]
summary: "How to use Graql analytics methods in Java"
sidebar: documentation_sidebar
permalink: /docs/examples/java-analytics
folder: docs
KB: genealogy-with-cluster
---

In this example, we are going to introduce the analytics package using the basic genealogy example. We will use Java APIs to determine clusters and degrees in the data - specifically we will determine clusters of people who are related by marriage and how large those clusters are using two graph algorithms:

* the cluster algorithm - to identify which people are related
* the degree algorithm - to count the size of the cluster.

<!-- TO DO - Put this back in 0.13

You can find *basic-genealogy.gql* in the *examples* directory of the Grakn distribution zip. You can also find it on [Github](https://github.com/graknlabs/grakn/blob/master/grakn-dist/src/examples/basic-genealogy.gql).

The first step is to load it into Grakn using the terminal. Start Grakn, and load the file as follows:

```bash
./grakn server start
./graql console -f ./examples/basic-genealogy.gql -k "genealogy"
```

You can test in the Graql shell that all has loaded correctly. For example:

```bash
./graql console -k genealogy
>>>match $p isa person, has identifier $i;
```
-->


## Getting Started

If you have not yet set up the Grakn environment, please see the [Setup guide](../get-started/setup-guide).

First, we start Grakn Engine using the terminal:

```bash
./grakn server start
```

The rest of the project is contained in the Java example code, which can be found on [Github](https://github.com/graknlabs/grakn/blob/master/grakn-dist/src/examples/basic-genealogy.gql). The maven dependencies for this project are:

```xml
<dependency>
<groupId>ai.grakn</groupId>
<artifactId>grakn-factory</artifactId>
<version>${grakn.version}</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
<groupId>org.slf4j</groupId>
<artifactId>slf4j-nop</artifactId>
<version>1.7.20</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
<groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
<artifactId>spring-boot-starter-tomcat</artifactId>
<version>1.2.4.RELEASE</version>
</dependency>
```

The `slf4j-nop` dependency is a work around because we are using a later version of Spark. The spring framework dependency is a current bug workaround in GRAKN.AI version 0.12.0.

First, we load the schema and data we will be working with, which is the familiar *basic-genealogy.gql* dataset.

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static void loadBasicGenealogy() {
    ClassLoader classLoader = Main.class.getClassLoader();
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {
        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.WRITE)) {
            try {
                tx.graql().parse(IOUtils.toString(classLoader.getResourceAsStream("basic-genealogy.gql"))).execute();
                } catch (IOException e) {
                    e.printStackTrace();
            }
            tx.commit();
        }
    }
}
```

## Connect to Grakn Engine

The next thing to do is connect to the running engine instance and check that the knowledge graph contains the data that we expect. This can be achieved with the following code:

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static void testConnection() {
    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        // open a tx (database transaction)
        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.READ)) {

            // construct a match to find people
            Match match = tx.graql().match(var("x").isa("person"));

            // execute the query
            List<Map<String, Concept>> result = match.limit(10).get().execute();

            // write the results to the console
            result.forEach(System.out::println);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

## Compute the Clusters

Now that we have established the connection to Grakn engine works we can obtain the transaction object and compute the clusters that we are interested in:

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static Map<String, Set<String>> computeClusters() {
    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        // open a tx (database transaction)
        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.READ)) {

            // construct the analytics cluster query
            ClusterQuery<Map<String, Set<String>>> query = tx.graql().compute().cluster().in("person", "marriage").members();

            // execute the analytics query
            Map<String, Set<String>> clusters = query.execute();

            return clusters;
            }
        }
    }
```

Here we have used the `in` syntax to specify that we want to compute the clusters while only considering instances of the types `marriage` and `person`. The knowledge graph that we are effectively working on can be seen in the image below. We can see three clusters, but there are more in the basic genealogy example. The code above will have found all of the clusters and returned a `Map` from the unique cluster label to a set containing the ids of the instances in the cluster.

If we had not used the members syntax we would only know the size of the clusters not the members.

![Visualiser UI](/images/java-analytics-1.png)


## Persist the Cluster Information

Now that we have information about the clusters, it would be useful to add it to the knowledge graph so that we can visualise it. We can do this by creating a new entity type called `cluster` and a new relationship type called `grouping` with the roles `group` and `member`. The schema can be mutated as follows:

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static void mutateOntology() {
    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        // open a tx (database transaction)
        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.WRITE)) {

            // create set of vars representing the mutation
            Var group = Graql.var("group").label("group").sub("role");
            Var member = Graql.var("member").label("member").sub("role");
            Var grouping = Graql.var("grouping").label("grouping").sub("relationship").relates(group).relates(member);
            Var cluster = Graql.var("cluster").label("cluster").sub("entity").plays(group);
            Var personPlaysRole = Graql.var("person").label("person").plays("member");
            Var marriagePlaysRole = Graql.var("marriage").label("marriage").plays("member");

            // construct the insert query
            InsertQuery query = tx.graql().insert(group, member, grouping, cluster, personPlaysRole, marriagePlaysRole);

            // execute the insert query
            query.execute();

            // don't forget to commit the changes
            tx.commit();
        }
    }
}
```

We also have to ensure that the existing types in the schema can play the specified roles.

Now all that is left is to populate the graph with the clusters and grouping relationships. To do this we can create a cluster for each result from the analytics query, which can then be attached to each of the concepts returned in the set of members:

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static void persistClusters(Map<String, Set<String>> results) {

    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        // iterate through results of cluster query
        results.forEach((clusterID, memberSet) -> {

            // open a tx (database transaction)
            try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.WRITE)) {

                    // collect the vars to insert
                    Set<Var> insertVars = new HashSet<>();

                    // create the cluster
                    Var cluster = Graql.var().isa("cluster");
                    insertVars.add(cluster);

                    // attach the members
                    memberSet.forEach(member -> {
                        Var memberVar = Graql.var().id(ConceptId.of(member));
                        insertVars.add(Graql.var().isa("grouping").rel("group", cluster).rel("member",memberVar));
                    });

                // execute query and commit
                tx.graql().insert(insertVars).execute();
                tx.commit();
            }
        });
    }
}
```

We can now switch to the visualiser, by browsing to [localhost:4567](http://localhost:4567), and execute this query:

```graql
match $x isa cluster; get;
```

If you explore the results you can now see the entities that are members of a given cluster, similar to the image shown below.

![Visualiser UI](/images/java-analytics-2.png)

## Compute the degrees

When using the visualiser it is probably quite useful to be able to see the size of the cluster before clicking on it. In order to add this information to the knowledge graph we will use another analytics function degree. The code to compute the degree is:

<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static Map<Long, Set<String>> degreeOfClusters() {
    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        // open a tx (database transaction)
        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.READ)) {

            // construct the analytics cluster query
            DegreeQuery query = tx.graql().compute().degree().in("cluster", "grouping").of("cluster");

            // execute the analytics query
            Map<Long, Set<String>> degrees = query.execute();

            return degrees;
        }
    }
}
```

The `in` syntax has again been used here to restrict the algorithm to the knowledge graph shown below. Further, the `of` syntax has been used to compute the degree for the cluster alone. What is returned from this calculation is a `Map` from the degree which is a `long` to the ids of the instances that have that degree.


## Persist the Degrees

As we did when computing the clusters, we need to put the information back into the knowledge graph. This time we will attach an attribute called `degree` to the cluster entity. The schema mutation and persisting of the degrees is performed in a single method:


<!-- We ignore these examples because try-with-resources isn't valid Groovy -->
```java-test-ignore
private static void persistDegrees(Map<Long, Set<String>> degrees) {
    // initialise the connection to Grakn engine
    try (GraknSession session = Grakn.session(Grakn.DEFAULT_URI, "genealogy")) {

        try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.WRITE)) {

            // mutate the schema
            Var degree = Graql.var().label("degree").sub("attribute").datatype(ResourceType.DataType.LONG);
            Var cluster = Graql.var().label("cluster").has("degree");

            // execute the query
            tx.graql().insert(degree, cluster).execute();

            // don't forget to commit
            tx.commit();
            }

            try (GraknTx tx = session.open(GraknTxType.WRITE)) {

            // add the degrees to the cluster
            Set<Var> degreeMutation = new HashSet<>();
            degrees.forEach((degree, concepts) -> {
                concepts.forEach(concept -> {
                    degreeMutation.add(Graql.var().id(ConceptId.of(concept)).has("degree",degree));
                });
            });

            // execute the query
            tx.graql().insert(degreeMutation).execute();

            // don't forget to commit
            tx.commit();
            }
        }
    }
```

We used a single transaction for this because it is a small knowledge graph.

We can now query for all the clusters in the visualiser, see their size and click on them to find the members.

<!-- IMAGE TO DO -->

## Summary

The complete working code can be found here in our `sample-projects` repo on [Github](https://github.com/graknlabs/sample-projects/tree/master/example-analytics-genealogy).
