docs/pages/docs/11-examples/modern.md, before:

---
title: Modern Example in Graql
keywords: graql, query
tags: [graql, examples]
summary: "A short example to illustrate Graql queries"
sidebar: documentation_sidebar
permalink: /docs/examples/modern
folder: docs
---

If you have not yet set up the Grakn environment, please see the [Setup guide](../get-started/setup-guide). For a comprehensive guide to all Graql keywords, please see the [Graql documentation](../querying-data/overview).

## Introduction
We have a few examples on how to work with Graql using different datasets. For example, see our [blog posts](https://medium.com/p/e1125e02dc85) and the [Quickstart Tutorial](../get-started/quickstart-tutorial) that introduces how to make Graql queries.

The following is a simple example enough to demonstrate some of the fundamentals of Graql.
We walk through the entities ("things") and relationships between them and show how to represent them using Graql to define a schema.
We then use Graql to add the data to the knowledge base.
The main purpose of this example, however, is to use it for practice at making sample queries on the knowledge base.

### Starting Graql

If it is not already running, start Grakn, then open a Graql shell:

```bash
cd [your Grakn install directory]
./grakn server start
./graql console
```

## Defining a Schema

In the example, we have a number of entities:

* people (marko, vadas, josh and peter), each of which has an age.    
* software (lop and ripple), each of which has an associated programming language.

The relationships between the entities are straightforward:

* there are two connections between marko and other people who he "knows" (josh and vadas).
* there are four connections between people and software, such that the people "created" the software. Lop was created by marko, peter and josh, which ripple was created by josh.

### Entities

Here, we add person and software entities, via the Graql shell:

```graql
define person sub entity;
define software sub entity;
```


### Resources

To assign resources to the entities, which you can think of as attributes, we use resources. First, we define what they are (age is a number, programming language is a string that represents the language's name), then we allocate them to the entity in question:

```graql
define age sub attribute datatype long;
define name sub attribute datatype string;
define person has age, has name;

define lang sub attribute datatype string;
define software has lang has name;

define weight sub attribute datatype double;
```

### Relations

Let's first define the relationship between people. The diagram shows that marko knows vadas, but we don't have any information about whether the inverse is true (though it seems likely that vadas probably also knows marko). Let's set up a relationship called `knows`, which has two roles - `knower` (for marko) and `known-about` (for vadas):

```graql
define knows sub relationship, relates knower, relates known-about, has weight;
define person plays knower;
define person plays known-about;
```

Note that the `knows` relationship also has an attribute, in the form of an attribute called `weight`.

We can set up a similar relationship between software and the people that created it:

```graql
define programming sub relationship, relates programmer, relates programmed, has weight;
define person plays programmer;
define software plays programmed;
```

And that's it. At this point, we have defined the schema of the knowledge base.

## Adding the Data
Now we have a schema, we can move on to adding in the data, which is pretty much just a typing exercise:

```graql
insert $marko isa person, has name "marko", has age 29;
insert $vadas isa person, has name "vadas", has age 27;
insert $josh isa person, has name "josh", has age 32;
insert $peter isa person, has name "peter", has age 35;
match $marko has name "marko"; $josh has name "josh"; insert (knower: $marko, known-about: $josh) isa knows has weight 1.0;
match $marko has name "marko"; $vadas has name "vadas"; insert (knower: $marko, known-about: $vadas) isa knows has weight 0.5;
```


```graql
insert $lop isa software, has lang "java", has name "lop";
insert $ripple isa software, has lang "java", has name "ripple";

match $marko has name "marko"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $marko, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.4;
match $peter has name "peter"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $peter, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.2;
match $josh has name "josh"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $josh, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.4;
match $josh has name "josh"; $ripple has name "ripple"; insert (programmer: $josh, programmed: $ripple) isa programming has weight 1.0;
```


## Querying

This example is designed to get you up close and personal with Graql queries. It will run through a few basic examples, then ask you a set of "Test Yourself" questions.

OK, so if you've followed the above, you should now have a schema and some data in a knowledge base. How do you go about using the knowledge base to answer your queries? That's where the `match` statement comes in.

As with any query language, you use a variable to receive the results of the get query, which you must prefix with a
`$`. So, to make the query "List every person in the knowledge base", you would use the following in Graql:

```graql
>>> match $x isa person, has name $n; get $n;

$n val "vadas" isa name;
$n val "marko" isa name;
$n val "josh" isa name;
$n val "peter" isa name;
```

In Graql, a match is formed of two parts: the `match` statement statement and any optional
[modifiers](../api-references/dml#modifier) that you choose to apply to the listing of results. Only the first part of a
match is needed: the modifiers are optional.

In the `match $x isa person` match we are not using any modifiers, so let's add some now. We use `order by` to modify
how the results are listed out - in this case, we order them by ascending age, so the youngest person is shown first.

```graql
>>> match $x isa person, has name $n, has age $a; order by $a asc; get $n, $a;

$x id "vadas" has age "27";
$x id "marko" has age "29";
$x id "josh" has age "32";
$x id "peter" has age "35";
```

## Complete Example
Here is the complete example - the code to define the schema and insert the data into a knowledge base. You can load this directly into Graql, if you don't want to type it out for yourself. Cut and paste the Graql below and start Graql:

```bash
./graql console
```

Then type edit, which will open up the systems default text editor where you can paste your chunk of text. Upon exiting the editor, the Graql will execute.

```graql
define

age sub attribute datatype long;
name sub attribute datatype string;
define person sub entity
  has age, has name;

insert $marko isa person, has age 29, has name "marko";
insert $vadas isa person, has age 32, has name "josh";
insert $josh isa person, has age 27, has name "vadas";
insert $peter isa person, has age 35, has name "peter";

define weight sub attribute datatype double;

knows sub relationship
    relates knower
    relates known-about
    has weight;

person plays knower;
person plays known-about;

match $marko has name "marko"; $josh has name "josh"; insert (knower: $marko, known-about: $josh) isa knows has weight 1.0;
match $marko has name "marko"; $vadas has name "vadas"; insert (knower: $marko, known-about: $vadas) isa knows has weight 0.5;

define
lang sub attribute datatype string;
software sub entity;
software has lang, has name;

insert $lop isa software, has lang "java", has name "lop";
insert $ripple isa software, has lang "java", has name "ripple";

define

programming sub relationship
    relates programmer
    relates programmed
    has weight;

person plays programmer;
software plays programmed;


match $marko has name "marko"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $marko, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.4;
match $peter has name "peter"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $peter, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.2;
match $josh has name "josh"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $josh, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.4;
match $josh has name "josh"; $ripple has name "ripple"; insert (programmer: $josh, programmed: $ripple) isa programming has weight 1.0;

```


## Test Yourself

1. List every person with their name and age in ascending age order


2. List every person who has an age over 30


3. List every person who knows someone else, and every person who is known about


4. List every person that Marko knows


5. List every item of software and the language associated with it


6. List everything that Josh has programmed


7. List everyone who has programmed Lop


8. List everything you know about Marko

Commit message:

Minor update in docs w.r.t the term "knowledge graph" (#2681)
* KBMS -> KGMS

* Knowledge Base -> Knowledge Graph

* knowledge base -> knowledge graph

* hyper-relational database -> knowledge graph

* fixed a bunch of lols

* more lols

docs/pages/docs/11-examples/modern.md, after:

---
title: Modern Example in Graql
keywords: graql, query
tags: [graql, examples]
summary: "A short example to illustrate Graql queries"
sidebar: documentation_sidebar
permalink: /docs/examples/modern
folder: docs
---

If you have not yet set up the Grakn environment, please see the [Setup guide](../get-started/setup-guide). For a comprehensive guide to all Graql keywords, please see the [Graql documentation](../querying-data/overview).

## Introduction
We have a few examples on how to work with Graql using different datasets. For example, see our [blog posts](https://medium.com/p/e1125e02dc85) and the [Quickstart Tutorial](../get-started/quickstart-tutorial) that introduces how to make Graql queries.

The following is a simple example enough to demonstrate some of the fundamentals of Graql.
We walk through the entities ("things") and relationships between them and show how to represent them using Graql to define a schema.
We then use Graql to add the data to the knowledge graph.
The main purpose of this example, however, is to use it for practice at making sample queries on the knowledge graph.

### Starting Graql

If it is not already running, start Grakn, then open a Graql shell:

```bash
cd [your Grakn install directory]
./grakn server start
./graql console
```

## Defining a Schema

In the example, we have a number of entities:

* people (marko, vadas, josh and peter), each of which has an age.    
* software (lop and ripple), each of which has an associated programming language.

The relationships between the entities are straightforward:

* there are two connections between marko and other people who he "knows" (josh and vadas).
* there are four connections between people and software, such that the people "created" the software. Lop was created by marko, peter and josh, which ripple was created by josh.

### Entities

Here, we add person and software entities, via the Graql shell:

```graql
define person sub entity;
define software sub entity;
```


### Resources

To assign resources to the entities, which you can think of as attributes, we use resources. First, we define what they are (age is a number, programming language is a string that represents the language's name), then we allocate them to the entity in question:

```graql
define age sub attribute datatype long;
define name sub attribute datatype string;
define person has age, has name;

define lang sub attribute datatype string;
define software has lang has name;

define weight sub attribute datatype double;
```

### Relations

Let's first define the relationship between people. The diagram shows that marko knows vadas, but we don't have any information about whether the inverse is true (though it seems likely that vadas probably also knows marko). Let's set up a relationship called `knows`, which has two roles - `knower` (for marko) and `known-about` (for vadas):

```graql
define knows sub relationship, relates knower, relates known-about, has weight;
define person plays knower;
define person plays known-about;
```

Note that the `knows` relationship also has an attribute, in the form of an attribute called `weight`.

We can set up a similar relationship between software and the people that created it:

```graql
define programming sub relationship, relates programmer, relates programmed, has weight;
define person plays programmer;
define software plays programmed;
```

And that's it. At this point, we have defined the schema of the knowledge graph.

## Adding the Data
Now we have a schema, we can move on to adding in the data, which is pretty much just a typing exercise:

```graql
insert $marko isa person, has name "marko", has age 29;
insert $vadas isa person, has name "vadas", has age 27;
insert $josh isa person, has name "josh", has age 32;
insert $peter isa person, has name "peter", has age 35;
match $marko has name "marko"; $josh has name "josh"; insert (knower: $marko, known-about: $josh) isa knows has weight 1.0;
match $marko has name "marko"; $vadas has name "vadas"; insert (knower: $marko, known-about: $vadas) isa knows has weight 0.5;
```


```graql
insert $lop isa software, has lang "java", has name "lop";
insert $ripple isa software, has lang "java", has name "ripple";

match $marko has name "marko"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $marko, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.4;
match $peter has name "peter"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $peter, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.2;
match $josh has name "josh"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $josh, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.4;
match $josh has name "josh"; $ripple has name "ripple"; insert (programmer: $josh, programmed: $ripple) isa programming has weight 1.0;
```


## Querying

This example is designed to get you up close and personal with Graql queries. It will run through a few basic examples, then ask you a set of "Test Yourself" questions.

OK, so if you've followed the above, you should now have a schema and some data in a knowledge graph. How do you go about using the knowledge graph to answer your queries? That's where the `match` statement comes in.

As with any query language, you use a variable to receive the results of the get query, which you must prefix with a
`$`. So, to make the query "List every person in the knowledge graph", you would use the following in Graql:

```graql
>>> match $x isa person, has name $n; get $n;

$n val "vadas" isa name;
$n val "marko" isa name;
$n val "josh" isa name;
$n val "peter" isa name;
```

In Graql, a match is formed of two parts: the `match` statement statement and any optional
[modifiers](../api-references/dml#modifier) that you choose to apply to the listing of results. Only the first part of a
match is needed: the modifiers are optional.

In the `match $x isa person` match we are not using any modifiers, so let's add some now. We use `order by` to modify
how the results are listed out - in this case, we order them by ascending age, so the youngest person is shown first.

```graql
>>> match $x isa person, has name $n, has age $a; order by $a asc; get $n, $a;

$x id "vadas" has age "27";
$x id "marko" has age "29";
$x id "josh" has age "32";
$x id "peter" has age "35";
```

## Complete Example
Here is the complete example - the code to define the schema and insert the data into a knowledge graph. You can load this directly into Graql, if you don't want to type it out for yourself. Cut and paste the Graql below and start Graql:

```bash
./graql console
```

Then type edit, which will open up the systems default text editor where you can paste your chunk of text. Upon exiting the editor, the Graql will execute.

```graql
define

age sub attribute datatype long;
name sub attribute datatype string;
define person sub entity
  has age, has name;

insert $marko isa person, has age 29, has name "marko";
insert $vadas isa person, has age 32, has name "josh";
insert $josh isa person, has age 27, has name "vadas";
insert $peter isa person, has age 35, has name "peter";

define weight sub attribute datatype double;

knows sub relationship
    relates knower
    relates known-about
    has weight;

person plays knower;
person plays known-about;

match $marko has name "marko"; $josh has name "josh"; insert (knower: $marko, known-about: $josh) isa knows has weight 1.0;
match $marko has name "marko"; $vadas has name "vadas"; insert (knower: $marko, known-about: $vadas) isa knows has weight 0.5;

define
lang sub attribute datatype string;
software sub entity;
software has lang, has name;

insert $lop isa software, has lang "java", has name "lop";
insert $ripple isa software, has lang "java", has name "ripple";

define

programming sub relationship
    relates programmer
    relates programmed
    has weight;

person plays programmer;
software plays programmed;


match $marko has name "marko"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $marko, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.4;
match $peter has name "peter"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $peter, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.2;
match $josh has name "josh"; $lop has name "lop"; insert (programmer: $josh, programmed: $lop) isa programming has weight 0.4;
match $josh has name "josh"; $ripple has name "ripple"; insert (programmer: $josh, programmed: $ripple) isa programming has weight 1.0;

```


## Test Yourself

1. List every person with their name and age in ascending age order


2. List every person who has an age over 30


3. List every person who knows someone else, and every person who is known about


4. List every person that Marko knows


5. List every item of software and the language associated with it


6. List everything that Josh has programmed


7. List everyone who has programmed Lop


8. List everything you know about Marko
