docs/pages/docs/11-examples/projects.md, before:

---
title: Example Projects
keywords: examples, projects
tags:
summary: "A list of potential projects that could use GRAKN.AI."
sidebar: documentation_sidebar
permalink: /docs/examples/projects
folder: docs

---

## Introduction

This page lists potential research projects that could be based upon Grakn. We have estimated the amount of work involved in them as T-shirt sizes (small, medium and large) and indicated the level of expertise we think would be required. If you are unsure of whether an idea would be suitable for you, please do talk to us. We are always happy to discuss your ideas, either based on these suggestions or for other projects. Just see our [Community page](https://grakn.ai/community) for ways to get in touch with us!

## Small

The following would particularly suit an undergraduate project.

### Rule-based Game Solver   
Define a simple schema, which is just a specification of the components of a system and how they relate, and then devise logical rules to construct a simple application. An example may be to produce a set of rules that can validate that a Sudoku puzzle has been filled correctly.

### Links Between Likes
Add a new feature to Moogi that allows users to “like” concepts. Then produce a visualisation that displays the link between the things that a user likes. For more information about Moogi, the film discovery engine that is built on Grakn, please see [https://moogi.co/](https://moogi.co/).

### Moogi Data Cleanup
Clean Moogi data and port it to Mindmaps. This requires dabbling a bit with Gremlin, scripting, exploring the knowledge base and ETL probably.

### knowledge base Database Pros and Cons
Write a review of knowledge base Database technologies with pros and cons and example apps.

### JavaScript Driver for Grakn
Create a prototype to interface with the Grakn REST API in a simple manner.

### Create a knowledge base Representation of a Website
Write a simple tool that follows links in a website and constructs a knowledge base representation of it in Grakn. This could simply be pages and links, but could even pull out structural information such as containers and side panes inside pages. Follow on projects could be:   
 - mapping click stream data onto the knowledge base - and analysing
 - analysing clusters and shortest paths through the website.

### Sports Results
For example, a knowledge base of the Rio Olympics stats dataset, Premier League results etc.

### Recommendation Engine
Shows how to leverage connections in your data to gather insights and start recommending currently unrelated but relevant facts.

## Medium

The following would particularly suit an undergraduate project.

### Game Search Engine   
Develop an application that shows how a base database can excel over RDBMS for certain domains. For example, a game search engine that has features like search by: genre, ratings, price, keywords, etc. You could pick any area you are interested in (books, music, recipes - the list goes on - the main requirement is something with a lot of highly connected data).   

Once this project has been tried and tested, it may be interesting to abstract it further and look at building a factory that creates the basic search engine, and can then be customised according to subject area and features.      

## Large

The following would be most suitable for postgraduate investigation.

### Semantic Machine Learning
Using Machine Learning to work with the semantics of the knowledge base.

### Publication Topology Based Ranking   
Semantic search engine for computer science publications. How do ranking results based on topology compare to user data? Can we use an ensemble measure to get “better” results?

### Life Sciences Knowledge Base
There is potential to use the open data from Elixir and Bioschemas.org to build a life science knowledge base.

### European Broadcast Union
The European Broadcast Union are interested interested in semantics and have documented what they are pursuing [here](https://nlpdbpedia2016.files.wordpress.com/2016/09/nlpdbpedia2016_paper_1.pdf).

Commit message:

Minor update in docs w.r.t the term "knowledge graph" (#2681)
* KBMS -> KGMS

* Knowledge Base -> Knowledge Graph

* knowledge base -> knowledge graph

* hyper-relational database -> knowledge graph

* fixed a bunch of lols

* more lols

docs/pages/docs/11-examples/projects.md, after:

---
title: Example Projects
keywords: examples, projects
tags:
summary: "A list of potential projects that could use GRAKN.AI."
sidebar: documentation_sidebar
permalink: /docs/examples/projects
folder: docs

---

## Introduction

This page lists potential research projects that could be based upon Grakn. We have estimated the amount of work involved in them as T-shirt sizes (small, medium and large) and indicated the level of expertise we think would be required. If you are unsure of whether an idea would be suitable for you, please do talk to us. We are always happy to discuss your ideas, either based on these suggestions or for other projects. Just see our [Community page](https://grakn.ai/community) for ways to get in touch with us!

## Small

The following would particularly suit an undergraduate project.

### Rule-based Game Solver   
Define a simple schema, which is just a specification of the components of a system and how they relate, and then devise logical rules to construct a simple application. An example may be to produce a set of rules that can validate that a Sudoku puzzle has been filled correctly.

### Links Between Likes
Add a new feature to Moogi that allows users to “like” concepts. Then produce a visualisation that displays the link between the things that a user likes. For more information about Moogi, the film discovery engine that is built on Grakn, please see [https://moogi.co/](https://moogi.co/).

### Moogi Data Cleanup
Clean Moogi data and port it to Mindmaps. This requires dabbling a bit with Gremlin, scripting, exploring the knowledge graph and ETL probably.

### knowledge graph Database Pros and Cons
Write a review of knowledge graph Database technologies with pros and cons and example apps.

### JavaScript Driver for Grakn
Create a prototype to interface with the Grakn REST API in a simple manner.

### Create a knowledge graph Representation of a Website
Write a simple tool that follows links in a website and constructs a knowledge graph representation of it in Grakn. This could simply be pages and links, but could even pull out structural information such as containers and side panes inside pages. Follow on projects could be:
 - mapping click stream data onto the knowledge graph - and analysing
 - analysing clusters and shortest paths through the website.

### Sports Results
For example, a knowledge graph of the Rio Olympics stats dataset, Premier League results etc.

### Recommendation Engine
Shows how to leverage connections in your data to gather insights and start recommending currently unrelated but relevant facts.

## Medium

The following would particularly suit an undergraduate project.

### Game Search Engine   
Develop an application that shows how a base database can excel over RDBMS for certain domains. For example, a game search engine that has features like search by: genre, ratings, price, keywords, etc. You could pick any area you are interested in (books, music, recipes - the list goes on - the main requirement is something with a lot of highly connected data).   

Once this project has been tried and tested, it may be interesting to abstract it further and look at building a factory that creates the basic search engine, and can then be customised according to subject area and features.      

## Large

The following would be most suitable for postgraduate investigation.

### Semantic Machine Learning
Using Machine Learning to work with the semantics of the knowledge graph.

### Publication Topology Based Ranking   
Semantic search engine for computer science publications. How do ranking results based on topology compare to user data? Can we use an ensemble measure to get “better” results?

### Life Sciences Knowledge Graph
There is potential to use the open data from Elixir and Bioschemas.org to build a life science knowledge graph.

### European Broadcast Union
The European Broadcast Union are interested interested in semantics and have documented what they are pursuing [here](https://nlpdbpedia2016.files.wordpress.com/2016/09/nlpdbpedia2016_paper_1.pdf).
